Understanding SC 1.4.1:
Use of Color (Level A)
In Brief
Goal
Color is not the only way of distinguishing information.
What to do
Use information in addition to color, such as shape or text, to convey meaning.
Why it's important
Not everyone sees colors or sees them the same way.
Success Criterion (SC)
Color is not used as the only visual means of conveying information, indicating an action, prompting a response, or distinguishing a visual element.

Note

This success criterion addresses color perception specifically. Other forms of perception are covered in Guideline 1.3 including programmatic access to color and other visual presentation coding.

Intent
The intent of this success criterion is to ensure that all sighted users can access information that is conveyed by color differences, that is, by the use of color where each color has a meaning assigned to it. If the information is conveyed through color differences in an image (or other non-text format), the color may not be seen by users with color deficiencies. In this case, providing the information conveyed with color through another visual means ensures users who cannot see color can still perceive the information.

Color is an important asset in the design of web content, enhancing its aesthetic appeal, its usability, and its accessibility. However, some users have difficulty perceiving color. People with partial sight often experience limited color vision, and many older users do not see color well. In addition, people using limited-color or monochrome displays and browsers will be unable to access information that is presented only in color.

Examples of information conveyed by color differences: “required fields are red", “error is shown in red", and “Mary's sales are in red, Tom's are in blue". Examples of indications of an action include: using color to indicate that a link will open in a new window or that a database entry has been updated successfully. An example of prompting a response would be: using highlighting on form fields to indicate that a required field had been left blank.

Note

This should not in any way discourage the use of color on a page, or even color coding if it is complemented by other visual indication.

Note

If content is conveyed through the use of colors that differ not only in their hue, but that also have a significant difference in lightness, then this counts as an additional visual distinction, as long as the difference in relative luminance between the colors leads to a contrast ratio of 3:1 or greater. For example, a light green and a dark red differ both by color (hue) and by lightness, so they would pass if the contrast ratio is at least 3:1. Similarly, if content is distinguished by inverting an element's foreground and background colors, this would pass (again, assuming that the foreground and background colors have a sufficient contrast).

However, if content relies on the user's ability to accurately perceive or differentiate a particular color an additional visual indicator will be required regardless of the contrast ratio between those colors. For example, knowing whether an outline is green for valid or red for invalid.

Note

This criterion does not apply to situations where color has not been used to convey information, indicate an action, prompt a response or distinguish a visual element. For instance, a hyperlink which has been styled to appear no different than neighboring static text would not fail this success criterion, as there would be no color differentiation between the actionable hyperlink text and the adjacent static text. Such lack of styling differentiation could result in poor usability for anyone looking at the interface, regardless of disability.

Note

This criterion does not directly address the needs of users with assistive technologies. It aims to ensure that sighted users who cannot distinguish between some colors can still understand content. How information is conveyed to assistive technology users is covered separately in other criteria, including (but not limited to) 1.1.1 Non-text Content, 1.3.1 Info and Relationships, and 4.1.2 Name, Role, Value.

Conversely, even if information that is conveyed by color differences is appropriately conveyed to assistive technologies, it does not necessarily pass this criterion, as sighted users who cannot distinguish between certain color may not necessarily be using any assistive technologies. This criterion requires a visible alternative to color.

Note

Most user agents provide users with a color-only cue that a link has been previously activated by them ("visited"). However, several technical constraints result in authors having very limited control over these color-only indications of visited links. The technical constraints are as follows:

User agents constrain the exposure of a link's visited state due to privacy concerns. Author queries to user agents will indicate all links have not been visited.
Any available information on the visited state of a link would be inaccurate since it is both user and browser-dependent. Even if an author could accurately get information on previously activated links by a certain user, the author would be constrained to the current browser's preserved history, and would be unable to determine if the user had visited the page using a different browser (or if the history was not preserved, either from cache clearing or use of private sessions).
Authors can only use color to modify the :visited CSS pseudoclass style. The technology constrains any non-color styling. Due to palette limitations, an author cannot use color alone to achieve 3:1 contrast between link and non-link text as well as between visited and unvisited links while also achieving 4.5:1 contrast for all link and non-link text.
Authors also cannot set the visited state of links. The anchor element does not include a "visited" attribute; therefore the author has no ability to alter the state through an attribute setting. As such, authors cannot achieve 1.3.1 Info and Relationships or 4.1.2 Name, Role, Value in regard to visited links.
For these reasons, setting or conveying a link's visited status is not an author responsibility. Where color alone distinguishes between visited and unvisited links, it does not result in a failure of this Success Criterion, even where the contrast between the two link colors is below 3:1. Note that authors must continue to ensure that all text links meet contrast minimums against the page background (SC 1.4.3).

Benefits
Users with partial sight often experience limited color vision.
Some older users may not be able to see color well.
Users with color vision deficiency who cannot distinguish between certain colors benefit when information conveyed by color is available in other visual ways.
People using limited color monochrome displays may be unable to access color-dependent information.
Users who have problems distinguishing between colors can look or listen for text cues.
Examples
A form that uses color and text to indicate required fields
A form contains both required and optional fields. Instructions at the top of the form explain that required fields are labeled with red text and also with an icon. Users who cannot perceive the difference between the optional field labels and the red labels for the required fields will still be able to see the icon next to the red labels.
An examination
Students view an SVG image of a chemical compound and identify the chemical elements present based both on the colors used, as well as numbers next to each element. A legend shows the color and number for each type of element. Sighted users who cannot perceive all the color differences can still understand the image by relying on the numbers.
Related Resources
Resources are for information purposes only, no endorsement implied.

Vischeck
AWARE Color Laboratory
Wikipedia: Color vision deficiency
Microsoft: Verify that a page is usable by people with color blindness
Causes and Incidence of Colorblindness
How to make figures and presentations that are friendly to Colorblind people
The Color Tutor application
Techniques
Each numbered item in this section represents a technique or combination of techniques that the Accessibility Guidelines Working Group deems sufficient for meeting this Success Criterion. A technique may go beyond the minimum requirement of the criterion. There may be other ways of meeting the criterion not covered by these techniques. For information on using other techniques, see Understanding Techniques for WCAG Success Criteria, particularly the "Other Techniques" section.

Sufficient Techniques
Select the situation below that matches your content. Each situation includes techniques or combinations of techniques that are known and documented to be sufficient for that situation.

Situation A: If the color of particular words, backgrounds, or other content is used to indicate information:
G14: Ensuring that information conveyed by color differences is also available in text
G205: Including a text cue for colored form control labels
G182: Ensuring that additional visual cues are available when text color differences are used to convey information
G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on hover for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them
Situation B: If color is used within an image to convey information:
G111: Using color and pattern
G14: Ensuring that information conveyed by color differences is also available in text
Advisory Techniques
Although not required for conformance, the following additional techniques should be considered in order to make content more accessible. Not all techniques can be used or would be effective in all situations.

C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus
Failures
The following are common mistakes that are considered failures of this Success Criterion by the Accessibility Guidelines Working Group.

F13: Failure of Success Criterion 1.1.1 and 1.4.1 due to having a text alternative that does not include information that is conveyed by color differences in the image
F73: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision
F81: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to identifying required or error fields using color differences only


Technique F13:
Failure of Success Criterion 1.1.1 and 1.4.1 due to having a text alternative that does not include information that is conveyed by color differences in the image
About this Technique
This technique relates to:

1.1.1: Non-text Content (Failure)
1.4.1: Use of Color (Failure)
This failure applies to all technologies.

Description
The objective of this technique is to describe the failure that occurs when an image uses color differences to convey information, but the text alternative for the image does not convey that information. This can cause problems for people who are blind, have low vision, or have color vision deficiency, because they will not be able to perceive the information conveyed by the color differences.

Examples
A bar chart of sales data is provided as an image. The chart includes yearly sales figures for four employees in the Sales Department. The text alternative for the image says, "The following bar chart displays the yearly sales figures for the Sales Department. Mary sold 3.1 Million; Fred, 2.6 Million; Bob, 2.2 Million; and Andrew, 3.4 Million. The red bars indicate sales that were below the yearly quota". This text alternative fails to provide the information which is conveyed by the color red in the image. The alternative should indicate which people did not meet the sales quota rather than relying on color.
Related Techniques
G94: Providing short text alternative for non-text content that serves the same purpose and presents the same information as the non-text content
Tests
Procedure
For all images in the content that convey information by way of color differences:

Check that the information conveyed by color differences is not included in the text alternative for the image.
Expected Results
If check #1 is true, then this failure condition applies and content fails the Success Criterion.


Technique F73:
Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision
About this Technique
This technique relates to 1.4.1: Use of Color (Failure).

This failure applies to any technology.

Description
The objective of this failure is to avoid situations in which people who cannot perceive color differences cannot identify links (when people with color vision can identify links). Link underlines or some other non-color visual distinction are required (when the links are discernible to those with color vision).

While some links may be visually evident from page design and context, such as navigational links, links within text are often visually understood only from their own display attributes. Removing the underline and leaving only the color difference for such links would be a failure because there would be no other visual indication (besides color) that it is a link.

Note

Red and pink are the same color (hue) but they have different lightness (which is not color). So red and pink would pass the requirement for "not distinguished by color (hue) alone" since they differ by lightness (which is not color) - as long as the difference in lightness (contrast) is 3:1 or greater. For example, if surrounding text is red and the link is pink it would pass. Similarly a light green and a dark red differ both by color and by lightness so they would pass if the contrast (lightness) difference is 3:1 or greater before focus or pointing.

There is no requirement that links be identifiable by people who cannot perceive color if they are not perceivable for those with color vision. (e.g. if the links are hidden for everyone – as in a game or test).

If the non-color cue only happens when the mouse hovers over the link or when the link receives focus, it is still a failure.

If the link is a different color and bold it would not fail because the boldness is not color dependent.

Examples
Example 1: Links with no underlines and similar contrast to body text
A web page includes a large number of links within the body text. The links are styled so that they do not have underlines and are very similar in color to the body text. This would be a failure because users would be unable to differentiate the links from the body text.

Example 2: Removing the underline from a link in a sentence or paragraph without providing another visual cue besides color
<head>
  <style>
    p a:link {text-decoration: none}
    p a:visited {text-decoration: none}
    p a:active {text-decoration: none}
    p a:hover {text-decoration: underline; color: red;}
  </style>
</head>
<body>
  <p>There are many resources to find out more about the 
     <a href="rain-in-spain.html">rain in Spain</a>.
  </p>
</body>
Note

If the visual cue is only provided on hover (as in the example above), it would still fail.

Related Techniques
G182: Ensuring that additional visual cues are available when text color differences are used to convey information
G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on hover for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them
Tests
Procedure
Check that each link in the page that is identifiable by color (hue) is visually identifiable via some other means (e.g., underlined, bolded, italicized, sufficient difference in lightness, etc).
Expected Results
If check #1 is false, then this failure condition applies and the content fails this Success Criterion.


Technique F81:
Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to identifying required or error fields using color differences only
About this Technique
This technique relates to 1.4.1: Use of Color (Failure).

This failure applies to all technologies.

Description
This objective of this technique is to describe the failure that occurs when a required field or an error field is marked with color differences only, without an alternate way to identify the required field or error field. This can cause problems for people with color vision deficiency or low vision, because they may not be able to perceive the color differences that indicate which field is required or which field is causing an error.

Examples
A user is completing an online form, and the phone number field is required. To indicate that the phone number field is required, the label "Phone Number" is displayed in a color different from the color used for optional fields, without any other indication that "Phone Number" is a required field. A person with color vision deficiency or low vision may not be able to identify that "Phone Number" is a required field.
A user submits an online form and leaves a required field blank, resulting in an error. The form field that caused the error is indicated by red text only, without an additional non-color indication that the field caused an error.
Note

In both examples, the color could be used without failure if the text was sufficiently different in visual presentation (e.g. bold or in a different font) that it would be easily differentiated from the surrounding text if the color were removed. It would also not fail if the color chosen had sufficient luminosity difference (lightness) from the other text that it would be easily be seen as different if viewed in black and white. A minimum contrast ratio of 3:1 is considered sufficient. In these cases - the information would not be displayed in color (hue) alone but also in "presentation" or "lightness" respectively. However, while this will satisfy the visual requirement for 1.4.1, the example may still fail other requirements, such as 1.3.1, 3.3.1, and 4.1.2.

Tests
Procedure
For all required fields or error fields in the web page that are identified using color differences:

Check that an non-color way to identify the required field or error field is provided.
Expected Results
If check #1 is false, then this failure condition applies and content fails the Success Criterion.


